Components are most basic building blocks of the Angular UI.
It consists of html,css spec.ts and ts file
.html file used for modifying the html template of the component
.css file used for keeping the css code of the component.
.spec.ts file is used for writing unit tests for our component.
components.ts it link all the other component files.

Selector and Template:

A selector is used to identify each component uniquely into the component tree.

TemplateUrls attribute: A template is an HTml view of the Angular component.

Module is a place where you can group the components, directives, pipes and services which are related to the application.

Data binding is the way to communicate  between the typescript code and the html view.

three ways of data binding:

one way data binding:
from ts to html (output):
	1.String Interpolation {{data}}
	2.Property binding [property]="data"

from .html to .ts 
	3.Event binding (event)="expression";
	generally expression is method that is called.

two way data binding:
	4.Both ways
	using NgModel :[("ngModel")]="data"

Directives:
Directives are classes that add additional behaviour to elemnets in our Angular application 
Types of directives:
1.Structural directives :  
	Structural directives change the appearance of DOM by adding or removing elements.
Ngif,NgFor and NgSwitch
Ngif is a structural directive that modifies DOM apperance based on condition.
NgFor is a structural directive used to ierate over a data structure and display it items or render a element multiple times on DOM.

NgSwitch is a structural directive that is used in combination with NgswitchCase and NgDefaultCase.

2.Attribute directive:
	Attribute directives change the appearance or behaviour of an element
NgClass, NgStyle

NgStyle: is a attribute directive that updates styles for the Html element.

NgClass: is a attribute directive that adds or remove css class on a Html element.

3.Component attributes : Directive with its own template.


What is Decorator?
Angular decorators stores metadata about a class,method or property.
All decorators are represented using @.

What are types of decorators?
1.Class decorators.
2. Property decorators.
3. Method decorator.
4. Parameter decorator.

LifeCycle hooks:
A component from creation to destruction goes through several stages and these stages are life cycle hooks.
NgOninit:Instatiated/Called when the component is created.
Most important hook of component cycle . It signals the activation of the created component so that developer can write componemt code. This is second hook and called after ngOnChanges().
Called only once.



NgOnChanges:Called when input property changes.
NgDoCheck:Use to check deep changes.
NgOnDestory:Called when he the component is destroyed.

Note : Constuctor: Its is a default method of typescript class which is executed when the class is instantiated. It always run before any angular hook and it is not a part of life cycle hook.

use of constructor :
Constructor is widely used to inject dependencies into the component class.


ngOninit vs contructor
NgOnInit is an angular lifecylce hook which signals the activation of the created component.
NgonInit is called after NgOnChanges lifecycle-hook.
When ngOnInit iscalled evrything about the compoent is already ready ,so it use is to perform most of the buisness logic on component.

costructor in angular is automatically instantiated when component is instantiated.
constructor is called before life cycle hooks
when contructor called verything in the component is not ready, so it is mostly used for dependency injection.

what is a asynchronous operation?
Since angular is js/ts is a single threaded methods

RxJS 
It is a library for handling asynchronous and event-based programs using observables.

Observables is a data stream.
Observer/Subscriber is one who receives the data from the stream.

What is Observable? How to implement Observable?

Observable is used to stream data to multiple components.
1.Import Rxjs Library
2.Create Observable and Emit data
3.and finally subscribe the da ta.


What is authentication and authorization in Angular?
Anthentication is the process of verifying users identity.
Authorization is the process of allowing a user to access resources as per the role. 

 
Pipes are simple function which accept an input value and return a tranformned value.

built-in pipes :data , uppercase,lowercase, decimal, currency, 

What is chaining pipes?
The chaining pipes use multiple pipes on the input data.


Explain service with example.

A Services is a typescript class and reusable logic/code that can be injected into multiple components with the help of Dependency injection.

How to create Service in angular?
- ng generate service <service name>

What is provide in Angular?

A provider is an object declared inside decorator which inform that a particular service is available for injecting inside the components.

 
What is the role of @Injectable Decorator ? How to use the service inside another service?

With Injectable decorator one service can be used by another service. 


WHat is the role o HttpClient in angular?

HttpClient is built-in service class available in angular
@angular/common.http package
perform http reuqest

What is asynchronous?
Asynchronous operation allow your program to start a task without blocking the main thread and continue the execution while waiting for the task to complete.


Why we use pipe and forkJoin
SwitchMap over subscribe
what is zone.js
What is difference between observable vs promise
what subject vs behaviour subject?


What is formControl, how to get all erros in reactive form.

whatis host binding, host listener.
what is ssr.
what is 






 
 


 
