Intro & Project 

Q: How do you introduce a project module by module? 
A: Start with the overall goal, then break down each module by functionality, tech stack, and team responsibility. 

🔹 Java Basics 

Q: What is Java 8 features? 
A: Lambda expressions, Stream API, Functional interfaces, Default methods, Date & Time API. 

Q: Difference between LinkedList and Array List? 
A: ArrayList is backed by an array and faster for index access; LinkedList uses nodes and is better for frequent insertions/deletions. 

Q: What is IOC and DI in Spring? 
A: IOC (Inversion of Control) lets Spring manage object creation; DI (Dependency Injection) provides required objects at runtime. 

Q: Difference between StringBuffer and StringBuilder? 
A: StringBuffer is thread-safe; StringBuilder is faster but not synchronized. 

Q: Difference between Comparator and Comparable? 
A: Comparable defines natural ordering via compareTo(); Comparator allows custom sorting via compare(). 

Q: HashMap vs Hashtable? 
A: HashMap is non-synchronized and faster; Hashtable is synchronized and thread-safe. 

Q: What are SQL joins? 
A: Joins combine rows from two or more tables based on related columns (INNER, LEFT, RIGHT, FULL). 

Q: What is JDBC? 
A: Java Database Connectivity is an API for connecting and executing queries with databases. 

Q: What are fixed inbuilt methods in Java? 
A: Common built-in methods include equals(), hashCode(), toString(), etc. 

Q: What is multithreading in Java? 
A: It allows concurrent execution of two or more threads for maximum CPU utilization. 

Q: What is JUnit? 
A: A unit testing framework for Java used to test individual units of code. 

🔹 Agile & Git 

Q: Difference between Agile and Waterfall? 
A: Agile is iterative and flexible; Waterfall is linear and sequential. 

Q: What are Git commands used in collaboration? 
A: git clone, git pull, git push, git commit, git branch, git merge. 

Q: What are Sprint and Scrum in Agile? 
A: Sprint is a time-boxed development cycle; Scrum is a framework for managing Agile projects. 

🔹 OOP & Java Features 

Q: What is abstraction and polymorphism in Java? 
A: Abstraction hides implementation; polymorphism allows method overriding and overloading. 

Q: What are Java 8 features to implement? 
A: Use lambda expressions, Stream API, and default methods in real-world scenarios. 

Q: What is garbage collection in Java? 
A: Automatic memory management that removes unused objects to free memory. 

Q: What is the String Pool? 
A: A memory area where Java stores string literals to optimize memory usage. 

🔹 JDBC & Collections 

Q: Write JDBC code steps. 
A: Load driver → Establish connection → Create statement → Execute query → Close connection. 

Q: What are HashMap and LinkedHashMap? 
A: HashMap stores data unordered; LinkedHashMap maintains insertion order. 

Q: Difference between Collection and Collections? 
A: Collection is an interface; Collections is a utility class with static methods. 

🔹 SQL & PL/SQL 

Q: What are SQL joins, DDL, DML, DCL? 
A: Joins combine tables; DDL defines structure; DML manipulates data; DCL controls access. 

Q: What are PL/SQL triggers, cursors, procedures, functions? 
A: Triggers auto-execute on events; cursors handle query results; procedures/functions encapsulate logic. 

Q: What are aggregate functions in SQL? 
A: Functions like SUM(), AVG(), COUNT() that operate on sets of values. 

Q: What is ACID in databases? 
A: Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability — properties ensuring reliable transactions. 

🔹 Exception Handling & Access 

Q: Difference between final, finally, finalize? 
A: final prevents modification; finally ensures code execution; finalize is called before garbage collection. 

Q: What are access modifiers in Java? 
A: public, private, protected, and default — control visibility of classes and members. 

Q: What are static and default keywords? 
A: static defines class-level members; default provides method implementation in interfaces. 

🔹 Threads & DBMS 

Q: What is thread lifecycle in Java? 
A: New → Runnable → Running → Blocked → Terminated. 

Q: What is synchronization and serialization? 
A: Synchronization controls thread access; serialization converts objects to byte streams. 

Q: What is normalization in DBMS? 
A: Organizing data to reduce redundancy and improve integrity (1NF, 2NF, 3NF). 

 

Core Java & Concepts 

Q: What is JUnit used for? 
A: JUnit is a unit testing framework for Java that helps test individual components of code. 

Q: What are Collections in Java? 
A: Collections are data structures like List, Set, and Map used to store and manipulate groups of objects. 

Q: Difference between Comparable and Comparator? 
A: Comparable uses compareTo() for natural ordering; Comparator uses compare() for custom sorting. 

Q: How do you add a variable to a class using SOLID principles? 
A: Use the Open/Closed Principle: extend the class via inheritance or composition without modifying existing code. 

Q: What is the difference between Collection and Collections framework? 
A: Collection is an interface; Collections is a utility class with static methods like sort(), reverse(). 

Q: What is memory management in Java? 
A: Java uses garbage collection to automatically manage memory by removing unused objects. 

🔹 Java 8 Features 

Q: What are functional interfaces? 
A: Interfaces with a single abstract method, used in lambda expressions (e.g., Runnable, Predicate). 

Q: What are lambda expressions? 
A: Short syntax for implementing functional interfaces, e.g., (a, b) -> a + b. 

Q: What is the Streams API? 
A: A Java 8 feature for processing collections in a functional style using operations like map, filter, reduce. 

Q: What are default and static methods in interfaces? 
A: Default methods provide implementation in interfaces; static methods belong to the interface class. 

Q: What is the new Date & Time API in Java 8? 
A: java.time package with classes like LocalDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime for better date handling. 

Q: What is the volatile keyword? 
A: Ensures visibility of changes to variables across threads. 

Q: What is serialization in Java? 
A: Converting an object into a byte stream for storage or transmission. 

 

🔹 SQL & JDBC 

Q: What are SQL joins with examples? 
A: Joins combine rows from multiple tables. Example: 

SELECT e.name, d.dept_name FROM employee e JOIN department d ON e.dept_id = d.id;  

Q: Difference between UNION, JOIN, and INTERSECT? 
A: 

UNION: Combines results of two queries, removes duplicates. 

JOIN: Combines rows based on related columns. 

INTERSECT: Returns common rows from two queries. 

Q: What are DML and DDL commands? 
A: 

DML: Data Manipulation Language (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE) 

DDL: Data Definition Language (CREATE, ALTER, DROP) 

Q: What are the 4 types of JDBC drivers? 
A: 

JDBC-ODBC Bridge Driver 

Native-API Driver 

Network Protocol Driver 

Thin Driver 

Q: What are the steps to JDBC connectivity? 
A: 

Load driver 

Establish connection 

Create statement 

Execute query 

Close connection 

🔹 Strings in Java 

Q: What is the String Pool in Java? 
A: A memory area where Java stores string literals to optimize memory usage and avoid duplication. 

Q: Difference between String, StringBuilder, and StringBuffer? 
A: 

String: Immutable 

StringBuilder: Mutable, not thread-safe 

StringBuffer: Mutable, thread-safe 

🔹 OOP & Java Basics 

Q: What are OOP concepts? 
A: Encapsulation, Inheritance, Polymorphism, Abstraction. 

Q: What are types of constructors in Java? 
A: 

Default constructor 

Parameterized constructor 

Copy constructor 

Q: What is the difference between ArrayList and LinkedList? 
A: ArrayList is faster for index access; LinkedList is better for insertions/deletions. 

Q: What is the lifecycle of a thread in Java? 
A: New → Runnable → Running → Blocked → Terminated. 

Q: What is synchronization and serialization? 
A: 

Synchronization: Controls thread access to shared resources. 

Serialization: Converts objects to byte streams for storage or transmission. 

🔹 Git, Linux & Agile 

Q: What are Git commands used in collaboration? 
A: git clone, git pull, git push, git commit, git branch, git merge. 

Q: What are basic Linux commands? 
A: ls, cd, pwd, mkdir, rm, touch, cat, chmod. 

Q: What is Agile methodology? 
A: An iterative development approach focused on collaboration, customer feedback, and small releases. 

🔹 Java Features & Code 

Q: What are Java features to write code for? 
A: 

Abstract classes 

Interfaces 

Lambda expressions 

Stream API 

Spring annotations 

Q: How do you reverse a string in Java? 
A: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("hello"); System.out.println(sb.reverse());  

Q: How to find the 2nd highest salary using SQL? 
A: 

SELECT MAX(salary) FROM employee WHERE salary < (SELECT MAX(salary) FROM employee);  

🔹 Project & Use Cases 

Q: How do you explain a project module-wise? 
A: Break down the project into functional modules, describe each module’s purpose, tech stack, and integration points . 

Q: How do you write a project use case with JUnit? 
A: 

Identify a feature 

Write a test class 

Use @Test annotation 

Assert expected behavior 

Q: What is a project proposal query? 
A: A sample SQL query or business logic that supports the project’s data flow or reporting requirement. 

 

Q: What is synchronization in Java? 
A: Controls access to shared resources in multithreaded environments to prevent race conditions. 

Q: What are threads in Java? 
A: Lightweight processes that run concurrently to improve performance. 

🔹 Git & Agile 

Q: What are common Git commands? 
A: git init, git clone, git add, git commit, git push, git pull, git status, git log. 

Q: What is Agile methodology? 
A: An iterative approach to software development focusing on collaboration, customer feedback, and small releases. 

Q: What is SDLC? 
A: Software Development Life Cycle — phases include requirement analysis, design, implementation, testing, deployment, and maintenance. 

🔹 SQL & JDBC 

Q: What are SQL joins? 
A: Combine rows from multiple tables based on related columns (INNER, LEFT, RIGHT, FULL). 

Q: What are JDBC calls? 
A: Steps include loading driver, establishing connection, creating statement, executing query, and closing connection. 

Q: What are aggregate functions in SQL? 
A: Functions like SUM(), AVG(), COUNT() that operate on sets of values. 

Q: What are PL/SQL triggers, cursors, procedures, functions? 
A: Triggers auto-execute on events; cursors handle query results; procedures/functions encapsulate logic. 

🔹 OOP & SOLID 

Q: What are OOP concepts? 
A: Encapsulation, Inheritance, Polymorphism, Abstraction. 

Q: What are access modifiers in Java? 
A: public, private, protected, and default — control visibility of classes and members. 

Q: What are exception handlers in Java? 
A: try, catch, finally, throw, and throws — used to handle runtime errors. 

Q: What is polymorphism in Java? 
A: Ability of an object to take many forms — method overriding and overloading. 

Q: What is the SOLID principle? 
A: Five design principles: Single Responsibility, Open/Closed, Liskov Substitution, Interface Segregation, Dependency Inversion. 

🔹 Miscellaneous 

Q: What is Log4J? 
A: A logging framework for Java used to record application behavior and errors. 

Q: What is the internal working of HashMap and HashSet? 
A: HashMap uses key-value pairs with hashing; HashSet uses HashMap internally to store unique elements. 

Q: What is the difference between HashMap and HashSet? 
A: HashMap stores key-value pairs; HashSet stores only unique values. 

Q: What is the purpose of a project read task? 
A: To understand architecture, flow, and implementation details for better contribution or debugging. 

🔶 Hour 1: Core Java + OOP + Collections 

🔹 Topics Covered 

OOP Concepts (Encapsulation, Abstraction, Polymorphism) 

Access Modifiers (public, private, etc.) 

Constructors (Types) 

Exception Handling (final, finally, finalize) 

String vs StringBuilder vs StringBuffer 

String Pool 

Collection Framework (ArrayList, LinkedList, HashMap, HashSet) 

Comparable vs Comparator 

Collection vs Collections 

🔹 Flow 

Recap (15 min): Quick whiteboard walkthrough of OOP and Collections 

Hands-on (25 min): 

Code: Reverse a string 

Code: Sort using Comparator 

Code: HashMap vs Hashtable demo 

Challenge (20 min): 

Scenario: Add a variable using SOLID (Open/Closed Principle) 

Quiz: Identify correct access modifier for given use case 

🔶 Hour 2: Java 8 + Threads + JDBC 

🔹 Topics Covered 

Java 8 Features: 

Lambda, Functional Interfaces, Stream API 

Default & Static Methods 

Threads Lifecycle 

Synchronization & Serialization 

JDBC: 

4 Driver Types 

Connection Steps 

Writing Queries 

🔹 Flow 

Recap (15 min): Diagram of thread lifecycle + JDBC flow 

Hands-on (25 min): 

Code: Lambda + Stream filter 

Code: JDBC connection + query 

Challenge (20 min): 

Task: Write JDBC code to fetch employee data 

Quiz: Match JDBC driver types to use cases 

🔶 Hour 3: SQL + Git + Agile + Project Use Case 

🔹 Topics Covered 

SQL: 

Joins (with examples) 

UNION vs JOIN vs INTERSECT 

DML vs DDL 

2nd Highest Salary Query 

Git Commands (collaboration focus) 

Agile Methodology + SDLC 

Project Breakdown (module-wise) 

Spring Basics (IOC, DI) 

JUnit (Use case testing) 

Log4J (Theory) 

🔹 Flow 

Recap (15 min): SQL joins visual + Git command cheat sheet 

Hands-on (25 min): 

SQL: Write JOIN + 2nd highest salary query 

Git: Simulate push/pull workflow 

Challenge (20 min): 

Task: Explain a project module using Spring + JUnit 

Quiz: Identify correct Git command for scenario 

 